{"Episode Name": "Ralph Nader, Consumer Crusader (Throwback)", "Podcast Name": "NPR - Throughline", "Episode Link": "https://www.npr.org/2025/01/16/1224897141/ralph-nader-consumer-crusader-throwback", "text": " Support for this podcast and the following message come from Alian's travel insurance, Planning on Jamaica for Christmas and Iceland and July, and all trips plan can protect your trips all year. Learn more at Alian'sTravel Insurance dot com. This message comes from Grammarly. At an enterprise level, nothing is more important than communication. Grammarly for enterprise enables your team to work smarter and faster. Other AI tools can't quantify business impact, but Grammarly gives you actionable insights and measurable results with features like their effective communication score, which tracks key metrics so you can make data-driven decisions to improve outcomes. Learn more at Grammarly.com slash enterprise. Hi, nice to meet you. Come on in. The year is 1960. Now, what kind of car we looking for today? You've got an urge to hit the open road to touch the black asphalt of the nation's new interstate highways that are being built all around the country. I think you're going to love this. Now all you need is the perfect car. They've just released this model. Compact, sleek, a thing of beauty. Have a safe drive. You turn on your car radio and that iconic summer place song starts playing. When you hit the highway, you roll your window down, letting the wind rush through your hair. This is the American dream, riding in an American car on an American road, boundless and free. When you come up across a slight turn, you keep your foot on the gas cruising along. For a moment, you feel the wheels slip. The car no longer in your control. But then it comes back again. You think it's fine? It's a brand new car right off the dealership block. You come up on another turn. This time, a wider one. You stay the course when all of a sudden your wheels lose traction with the road. The paramedics will later tell you you're a lucky one. As you crawl out of the driver's window, you think to yourself, what happened? How could driving a brand new car end up with me lying on the road? This is my point. Either it's sheer callousness or indifference or they don't bother to find out how their cars behave. That's a young Ralph Nader talking about car safety. Ralph Nader has announced he will run for president as a third-party candidate again. Yes, that Ralph Nader. He's made four runs for the presidency as a third-party candidate, most infamously in the year 2000, when some people felt that his run led to Democratic candidate Al Gore losing to Republican candidate George W. Bush. So if you're feeling skeptical, we get it. But bear with us, because before Ralph Nader was infamous, he was famous. I was better known by more people in the United States than Taylor Swift is today. Okay, so that's definitely an exaggeration. But he's right that for a long time, he was one of the most trusted people in America. Some people even called him Saint Ralph. He's the reason any new car that gets sold today has to comply with the set of federal safety standards. This is a bill for the vast number of millions of unrepresented American consumers, who need representation before federal regulatory agency. And car safety was only the beginning, because Nader felt that in a country increasingly dominated by corporations controlling our access to basic goods, the people who used those goods, the consumers, had rights. He fought to guarantee them, and in many cases, he won. The right to clean drinking water, the creation of the Environmental Protection Agency, whistleblower protections, the Freedom of Information Act, and more. Nader was instrumental in all of them. His activism and efforts spurred the modern consumer movement. A movement fueled by the idea that public citizens, consumers, people like you and me, can and should hold governments and corporations accountable to our needs. Several brands of ground cinnamon containing elevated levels of lead. And now recommends recalls of ground cinnamon from six distributors. That recalling one million vehicles worldwide over a potential airbag issue. FDA is reporting another baby formula recall. Health officials say an infant has died from a listeria outbreak that's tied to ready to eat meat. And today, when product recalls are at the highest level since before the pandemic, when our own expectations of safety and government trust are eroding, we're going to revisit a time where a generation of people felt activated and empowered to take matters into their own hands. To demand the government back them up, so they could stand up to corporations and say, enough is enough. I'm Ronda D'Fetha. And I'm Ramtin Arablui. Today on the show, the story of consumer activism in the U.S. And what we can learn from Ralph Nader's wins and losses. Coming up, Nader opens up the dream of the American car and takes a look under the hood. Hi, I'm Faith Garrosette. I'm from Harrisburg, Pennsylvania, and you're listening to through line. This message comes from Rince. These days, you can do a lot from your phone. Book of Vacation, Buy and Trade Stocks, but you can also make your dirty laundry disappear. And then reappear, washed and folded with Rince. Schedule a pickup with the Rince app, and before you know it, your clothes are back folded and ready to wear. They even do dry cleaning. Sign up now and get $20 off your first order at Rince.com. That's R-I-N-S-E dot com. This message comes from Home Instead. Home Instead knows that if you leave home to seek aging care, you leave behind more than just empty rooms. You say goodbye to the place where you built your life. So why not stay home instead? With help from Home Instead and their trusted caregivers, you can stay in the place where your memories were made. Learn more at homeinstead.com. Home Instead, for a better what's next. Support for NPR and the following message come from Betterment. The automated investing and savings app. CEO Sarah Levy shares how Betterment utilizes tech tools powered by human advice. Betterment is here to help customers build wealth their way. And we provide powerful technology and complete human support, where technology can deliver ease of use and affordability, and the people behind that technology can provide advice and guidance. Learn more at Betterment.com. Investing involves risk. Performance not guaranteed. Part 1. Life is a highway. What's a certainly freedom of the road? When you were in a car driving, you were the queen or king of the car. In the 1950s, the car was becoming as much a symbol of American freedom as the bald eagle. And what you did in the back seat was no one else's business. I listened. Outside a rambler. Or spower. The pound pound pound as the wheels hit the ground. Domination. With the famous rocker engine, you hide from a drive and future. Hey, they love these dream boats. Cyclosexual vehicles. Think it now. I want to throw to take the wheels. I'll rock it all. I'll be in performance since the storm. It was all revolting to me. Ralph Nader was born in 1934. Well, my parents were immigrants from Lebanon, and that they sailed past the Statue of Liberty that took it seriously, which means that it isn't just freedom thereafter, they wanted freedom to make a difference. Nader came of age during the post-war era, a time when peace and economic prosperity collided with looming fears of nuclear war. His parents wanted nader and his siblings to trust their own instincts, instead of blindly accepting what they were told by other authority figures. One time I came home from school, my dad said, what'd you learn today? Did you learn how to believe or did you learn how to think? In the heyday of automobiles, amid all these commercials with gleaming tail fins and chrome bumpers, nader saw through the romanticism of the open road straight to its dark underbelly. The American dream was more of an American massacre. I lost a lot of friends in car crashes. They were killed or they were permanently disabled. It's far, far worse than it is today. Fatal car crashes were nearly five times more common back then, and it seemed like everyone knew someone who'd been in a serious accident. But the prevailing narrative was that this was a matter of user error. People were being reckless drivers. And that didn't make sense to nader. How could it be the commuting to work or going grocery shopping could amount to a death sentence for so many people? I kept thinking of people who could be living productive lives today and who were killed and totally survivable crashes. I began looking at the cars and how they were crushed in and when I was at law school, he set out to bust the myth of the open road. As glamorous as that may sound, solving the mystery of these grizzly car crash deaths, mostly involved a lot of reading of very wonky documents. And I mean a lot. If Here on US Highway number one near Laurel, Maryland. Which night out now there were three people in this car and the driver stayed in the car, but now the other two people hit the windshield and then apparently they went out of the right hand door, all the right hand door. Like any good detective, Nate are even pounded the pavement. What he found was that the auto industry knew that it was cars themselves that were unsafe. Doctors and researchers had repeatedly recommended features to add to the cars to make them safe. Seat belts padded dash panels roll over bars, but the car makers often shot away from putting these features into cars on the market. It punctured the advertising fantasy of these auto companies. So, Nate are set out to take down the auto industry. To do that, he knew he was going to need to harness the power of the consumer. I have sent to the Congress today a special message on protecting the consumer interests. All of us are consumers. That's President John F. Kennedy speaking in 1962, and he was identifying a powerful new current in American life. They cross the American consumer landscape of this time period as the question of Ken companies and governments that have become increasingly powerful can they be trusted to look out for the interest of the individual. This is Paul Sabin. He's a professor of history and American studies at Yale University. There's a sense that really there needs to be someone looking out for this consumer. All of us deserve the right to be protected against fraudulent or misleading advertisements and labels. There was a growing call for consumers to take up that charge themselves, and Nate are was at the front of the line. I think for Nader, the consumer citizen is an active citizen, one that is investigating, learning, and engaging in political processes. He wanted the informed citizen. But that informed consumer citizen first had to be awakened. And so Nader threw up his bat signal to concern consumers across the nation. It came in the form of a book that he started to write after graduating law school. And the book opened with the case of one car in particular. You are about to meet a true international beauty. Or there. And the Corvera was a unique design because it had its engine and the rear. Someone once said you were the bumper on the Corvera. Mrs. Peery, the vehicle, was traveling about 35 miles per hour in a 35 mile per hour zone. These are excerpts from that book, unsafe at any speed. The designed in dangers of the American automobile. And then all of a sudden, the vehicle made a sharp cut to the left and swerved over. It would fear out of control and roll over and kill people. He rushed over to the wreck and saw an arm with a wedding band and a wrist swatch lying on the ground. Miss Peery was very calm, only saying that something went wrong with my steering. I knew it was a book that had dynamite potential. The tragedy was overwhelmingly the fault of cutting corners to shave costs. This happens all the time in the automobile industry. What was there for General Motors to say? Publicly, General Motors had nothing to say. But the allegations hit hard because GM was a tie-in. At the time the book was published, they were the world's largest car manufacturer, responsible for nearly half of all US automotive sales. Years later, a government study found that the corvette wasn't any more dangerous than other similar cars. Nader disputed the study. But by that time, there was no turning back the movement Nader had started. In response to the criticism, GM created a position for a coordinator of auto safety. But Nader's book wasn't just about exposing a problem with the corvette or even with General Motors. It was about revealing failures across the entire auto industry. It didn't take long for unsafe at any speed to start drawing the attention of important people in the capital, including a young woman who would be instrumental in turning Ralph's words into action. My name is Joan Claybrok, C-L-A-Y-B-R-O-O-K. At the time, Joan was in Washington, DC on a fellowship, working with James A. Mackie, a US representative from Georgia. He said he wanted me to work on auto safety, which totally dumbfounded me, because I didn't know anything about it at all. He gave me Ralph Nader's book on safe at any speed, which had just come out a month before. The book hit home for Joan. My boss had a corvette, and she had a car crash. Shortly after I got to Washington, she was very badly injured. Joan knew that Nader's allegations against the auto industry were monumental, and representative Mackie tasked her with tracking down Nader and getting him into the office for a discussion. That was easier said than done, because no one knew where he lived. All she had to go off of was a phone number. And I called him, you know, like 20 times in the next week. Never answered the phone. And finally, a total anger one evening at midnight, I called him, and he answered the phone. Ralph Nader? She convinces him to visit representative Mackie's office. When he walks in, he's a towering presence. He's six feet four and lanky. But when he sits down, he kind of goes into this mode where you think he's not so tall. He's very shy. Unless you ask him something, he's not going to interrupt you or start the conversation. And Mr. Mackie was a very talkative cylinder. And so he talked for about 45 minutes. Just a straight monologue. And then he looked at his watch. He said, oh my goodness, I've to go to the meeting 15 minutes. Mr. Nader, what should we do? And so Nader set his piece, right a bill with teeth that wrangles this wild west auto industry and saves lives in the process. And so then he'd left. And I suddenly realized I only had the room in house phone number. So I ran down the hall and I said, Mr. Nader, is there a better phone number to reach? And he said, no. So I knew I was going to be calling him at midnight a lot. And with that, their work together really began. And so did the pushback. General Motors decided this was a great threat. They had been unleashing private detectives months after month following me everywhere. Nader suspected they were wiretapping his phone. He says he'd get strange calls in the middle of the night threatening and harassing him. They used XFBI agents often for their so-called investigation of critics. They tried to seduce me with young ladies. They followed him into the safe way. I would be shopping. And he was here at the cookie counter. And he loves sweets. And this woman approached him and said, but he'd like to come up to her apartment. No time. A young lady came up and she said, you look like a studious fellow. We're forming a study group to study foreign affairs. How would you like to join us? And he said, no, thank you. A private detective who investigated Nader later denied making any attempt to put him in a compromising position with these women. But he did admit to surveilling Nader and trying to dig up dirt on his private life. They were just endless attempts to kind of document but he was a bad person or he was taking money from somebody to do this. The press got wind of the story along with Congress. And so I said to people, we're going to have a public hearing. And I was invited to testify. I don't want to have a climate in this country where one has to have an aesthetic existence and stealing determinations in order to speak truthfully and candidly and critically of American industry. And he commanded the president of General Motors. His name was Roach. I love the name. Roach. Hey, he has Mr. Roach, told Mr. Roach to come and testify. Roach got up and said that when he first heard of the allegations against GM, he was shocked. He immediately ordered a statement to be released denying GM's involvement. But he discovered, quote, to my dismay, we were indeed involved. Let us assume that you found something wrong with this sex life. What would that have to do with whether or not he was right or wrong on the car there? Nothing. Senator Ribacoff declared in front of the Senate committee that Ralph Nader was squeaky clean. He said, quote, they put you through the mill and they haven't found a damn thing out against you. I want to apologize here and now, but members of this subcommittee and Mr. Nader. This public apology couldn't have been a better press moment for Nader's crusade. Try to imagine how monumental this would have been. It would be like if Elon Musk apologized for harassing a critic of Tesla. It would be front page news. And it was. People were outraged that a major American corporation would attempt to intimidate a whistleblower. GM's plan to discredit Nader had backfired. Ralph became suddenly this national figure. Unlike a lot of people who would just be happy to sell some more books, Ralph wanted this law past. So he then lobbied. And that's what I did every day in Washington, DC. He was hard for him to lobby because he is shy. He had to push himself to go do that. But he kept at it. And Joan Claybrook and Representative Mackie introduced their bill. And within a few short months, the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act passed into law. Just think of how fast Congress acted compared to the sluggish, indentured corporate gridlock of today within six months from March 1966. And in September, I was invited to the signing ceremony at the White House, among others, where he handed out the signature pens. Six months. Ralph Nader had won his first victory on behalf of the American consumer. And he was just getting started. That's coming up. This is Justin Mish from Indianapolis in the air. And you're listening to the through line from NPR. This message comes from Midi Health. Women in midlife face a health care desert. But Midi is here to fill the gap, offering expert care for paramenipas and menipas covered by insurance. Hot flashes, insomnia, brain fog, weight gain, and moodiness don't have to be accepted as just another part of aging. Midi clinicians understand how these symptoms can connect to menipas and prescribe a wide range of solutions. Book your visit today at joinmidi.com. That's joinmidi.com. Support for NPR and the following message come from Betterment, the automated investing and savings app. CEO Sarah Levy shares how Betterment utilizes tech tools powered by human advice. Betterment is here to help customers build wealth their way. And we provide powerful technology and complete human support, where technology can deliver ease of use and affordability. And the people behind that technology can provide advice and guidance. Learn more at Betterment.com. Investing involves risk, performance, not guaranteed. This message comes from NUAM, pairing weight loss medication with their behavior change program to help people lose weight. Starting at $149, and able to ship to your door in seven days, learn more at NUAM.com. That's n-o-o-m.com. NUAM, the smart way to lose weight. Not all customers will medically qualify for prescription medications. Compounded medications are not reviewed by the FDA for safety, efficacy, or quality. Individual results may vary. Part two, Raider Nation. He's an attorney. He's from the nation's capital. And recently, he's been called the man who makes waves. What indeed makes Ralph Nader run? The incomparable Mr. Ralph Nader. Ralph Nader. Ralph Nader. Ralph Nader. Ralph Nader. I became very famous. For years after Nader's very public victory against the auto industry, he seemed to be everywhere. I was in a cover of time, Newsweek, when that meant something. Newsweek depicted him like a night in shining armor, the consumer crusader. He's seen as this honest good guy who is representing the people. He's on Saturday Night Live as a parody of himself. He's a hot dog you're eating? Go home? A hot dog? Do you enjoy eating rap excrement and rodent hairs? And he's on all the popular interview shows. So you sue it. And you hit it for all its worth. But who's in a worse benefit? Mr. Nader, I want you to work on this. Including one that was briefly co-hosted by the counterculture of icons of the air. A couple of the micro-rescales is John Lemon. He's a local owner of Mike's Caros hostess beat. Who asked him to weigh in on the power of voting. Democracy means, at a word, and a self-government. And anytime we delegate our responsibilities, it's for convenience, the government agencies, and other institutions. And I think I don't think we can afford that convenience. If people didn't know Ralph Nader's name before, by the 1970s, Nader was a household name. And my parents said to me in their own folksy way, say, well, Ralph, now you're very famous. So let's see how you endure it. For Nader, his fame served one purpose and one purpose only to continue demanding more protections for consumers. He just called all the time. I mean, he'd love to use the telephone. So he was checking with me all the time. What's going on? Who's doing this? What's happening? This is Joan Claybrook again. She stayed in touch with Ralph and continued working on car safety issues. I was just inside for us. You know? And so I would tell him. I was going on. So that's how he kept up with the auto safety staff, because now he was on to other tracks. All around him, Nader could see how people were being sold shotty goods. The safety of additives in some baby foods was questioned today by Ralph Nader, the consumer advocate. And expected to live and work in unsafe conditions. Even if we stop all mercury dumping into the water and onto the land, the existing amount of mercury will stay with us for up to 100 years. So Nader used his newly found fame to bring these issues to the forefront and galvanize people into taking action as consumers and form a movement. I didn't want to be at the Lone Ranger. So where do I go for help? Well, law students. It started off small with Nader calling law students, including from his alma mater, Harvard, in search of people eager to make change. Hey, Ralph Nader's on the phone. It worked. These students knew who he was and they wanted in. I couldn't have been more excited if he said it was the Queen of England. Nader had plenty of work for them. And thanks to his settlement with GM, he had money to fund it. It was a perfect opportunity to get some students interns during the summer, put them on projects investigating to food drug administration, the Interstate Commerce Commission and on, and they would have press conferences and they would get great press coverage. And that would get the attention again, the members of Congress. You have that virtuous circle. These young idealistic lawyers and students came to be called Nader's Raiders. Come spring, Nader's Raiders will be swooping down. For now, they're lying back in the shadows of Ivy League universities, gathering ammo. Funds are low, hours are long, and only intense dedication, determination, and idealism keeps Nader's Raiders going. They didn't get a box. It was hot. I mean, Ralph would call each one of these staff people every other day. And then he would ask them to write memos on what they'd found and he would sub-guide them on to investigate. John Claybrook, looking to get out of government work for a while, believed in Nader, and joined. Oh, definitely. I was one of the Raiders. These companies, agencies weren't doing their job. And we wanted them to do their job. They had authority to do things and weren't paying any attention to it, which was the case in many cases. We were there to badge of them and to push them. They started with the Federal Trade Commission. The Commission does not view American industry as a wild horse at all, but rather as a docile beast who now and then needs a mild, whoa. Then they went after the Food and Drug Administration. The FDA has so minimized the dangers from food additives that it has effectively destroyed the letter and spirit of the food additives amendment. And kept going all the way to the halls of Congress. Mater and his citizen army of over 1,000 are out to awaken the country to Congress's crying need for reform. He publishes what's effectively a consumer guide to Congress, and this was a broadening of his definition of consumer. The responsibility for good government does not rest with our politicians, according to Ralph Nader. It rests with each private citizen. The driving force of the consumer movement was a reinvigorated view of democracy, where everyone was a consumer and everyone participated. People really responded to this message across the country, local consumer groups popped up. Today, the buying public has awakened and increasingly demands more information about the American marketplace. It wasn't long before Congress began to respond to Ralph Nader, and the public's demands for change. We got led out of gasoline and paint. They got what now might seem like common sense protections passed. These are things that include clean air act, clean water act, but it's also things like the occupational safety and health administration getting created. OSHA, the Clean Air Act, laws that have made American life healthier and safer, and it wasn't just environmental protections. Nader also fought the strength in the Freedom of Information Act to increase the public's access to federal data and records. It's a law for the people. The winds were stacking up for Nader and the consumer movement throughout the 1970s, but not everyone was on board with this growing consumer movement and Ralph Nader's vision of an energized consumer citizen. I think you see an immediate backlash to him from corporate interest. Business leaders and of course the car industry. How long been where he of Nader? I have some very serious reservations about some of his positions and some of the levels of expertise that he professes to have. But as the power of the consumer movement grew, a conservative political backlash started to take shape, spearheaded by a soon-to-be US Supreme Court Justice named Lewis Powell. There's a very famous memo that gets written by Lewis Powell, the Powell memo. Lewis Powell, who becomes a justice, but at the time he is working with the Chamber of Commerce, and he publishes this sort of confidential memo at the time, a week later gets leaked in which he is warning of these threats on the horizon, and Nader is very prominent in that. Perhaps the single most effective antagonist of American business is Ralph Nader, who, thanks largely to the media, has become a legend in his own time and an idol of millions of Americans. The Powell memo is really a calling to action, to conservatives, and to business that they need to develop an ideological counterbalance to this new public interest and citizen movement. Business must learn the lesson long ago learned by labor and other self-interest groups. This is the lesson that political power is necessary, that such power must be assiduously cultivated, and that when necessary, it must be used aggressively. Coming up, big business strikes back. Hi, I'm David. I'm calling from Austin, Texas, and you're listening to through line from NPR. This message comes from NPR sponsor REI Co-op. You can't make more time, but when you opt outside, you can make the most of it. So make time for those early mornings, last minute trips and timeless views, for small victories, big fails, and everything in between. And when you're ready, REI has the gear, clothing, classes, and advice to help you make the most of your time out there. Visit your local REI Co-op or REI.com slash opt outside. Part 3. We the consumer. It's the summer of 1976, the country is celebrating the nation's bicentennial anniversary, and the mood is especially festive in Plains, Georgia. Carter and his brother, they're all playing softball. Where Democratic presidential candidate Jimmy Carter, a self-proclaimed consumer advocate, is playing a game of softball with family, secret service agents, and... ...nader is appointed to be the umpire. Ralph Nader. And Nader's behind the base, you know, in a suit and in a tie, Jack and Ty, he's a lifelong Yankees fan, you know, calling balls and strikes and things like that. Nader had traveled down to Georgia to outline what he thought needed to be done to further consumer rights. Number one on that list, create a consumer protection agency. Carter is cultivating Nader as a candidate would to try to, you know, win over his constituency. And Carter, you know, declares that he wants to be the great representative of the consumer, and he's going to sweep, you know, sweep the halls of, you know, Washington, D.C., clean, and Nader, you know, supports him. He's very excited. So, back to the ball game. Carter doesn't always agree with Nader's calls. It's a spirited game. And in many ways, it's a symbolic one, too. Is Nader going to be an umpire or is he going to be a player? You know, so you're going to join the administration or is he going to stay on the outside watching over the administration and judging it? Yeah, not subtle. And this is, you know, was a real question. A few months after their softball game in Georgia, Jimmy Carter wins the presidential election. At the election celebration, he promised to be a president for the people. If we could just say, have a government, as I've said, a thousand times, as good as our people are, that's all we can hope for, and that's all we can expect. And that's enough. We're going to have a great government, a great nation, and it's because of you, not me. And it looked like a real win for the consumer rights movement. Many former Nader's raiders actually joined Carter's administration, but not Nader. He, one of easily, had a high level appointment in the Carter administration. He decides he's going to be an umpire. He believes in the permanence of this whole sector that he's been involved in creating, and they need to stay outside the government, and they need to watch over the agencies, and hold even their allies accountable. Former allies, like Joan Claybrook, who he publicly accused of going too easy on the car industries roll out of airbags. He, uh, blasted me. I mean, betrayed my own personal standards. And so I didn't talk to Ralph for quite some time after that. Nader wasn't going to hold back against friends or foes. He was still fighting for the consumer, and his number one goal was to finally get the consumer protection agency he'd been fighting for, four years, created. This little agency that could take other regulatory agencies to court and make them change their behavior, make them go from inaction to action, or make them strengthen weak standards into stronger standards. And it would be the voice and the muscle of the consumer movement. The builds created had come close several times, but never quite made it through. The hope was that Carter would be able to push it through. But unfortunately, the crown jewel of the consumer movement never made it into law. In 1978, the effort to create the consumer protection agency came to a grinding end. Looking back on it, that was the high water mark. The failure of the consumer protection agency, that that is his life's work and it fails. And it's a sign that he's no longer on the ascendance and you're starting to move to more defensive positioning to try to protect the gains. People who want to work but can't find jobs are part of today's other bad economic news. By the late 70s, early 80s, the political climate was beginning to change as high inflation, unemployment, and gas shortages rattled the country. Isn't this disgusting? Why doesn't anybody contact the president? Why is he letting this happen to us? So you have inflation and issues about employment and these things start to get blamed on environmental regulation and safety. If only we would get rid of these regulations, things would be cheaper the economy would be doing better. Basically it boils down to the country. It's going to the piss. But it was too late. Carter had lost the trust of the people and Nader's call for more regulations wasn't resonating anymore and their stead was a new voice. Many Americans today, just as they did 200 years ago, field burdened, stifled and sometimes even by government that has grown too large, too bureaucratic, too wasteful, too unresponsive, too uncaring about people and their problems. You start to see the emergence of ideas that would be held more, that would be articulated by the Reagan Republicans in the early 80s. But the this includes attack on sort of socialistic, and any state, government interventions, out of control, you know, government agencies, out of control, public interest. Americans who have always known that excessive bureaucracy is the enemy of excellence and compassion, want a change in public life. In 1981, when Ronald Reagan became president, he immediately started to roll back many of the regulatory protections that Nader and the consumer movement had fought for, including gutting the EPA's budget and refocusing OSHA to benefit small businesses rather than workers. I put a freeze on pending regulations and set up a task force under Vice President Bush to review regulations for the night toward getting rid of as many as possible. The heyday of the consumer movement was over. But Ralph Nader wasn't gone from the public eye. Throughout the 80s and 90s, he won some key fights for consumers, like finally making airbags of federal requirement and rolling back steep car insurance rates in California. And in 2000, he tried to take on an even more public role. Ralph Nader campaigning in Madison today, despite mounting criticism that he might cost Al Gore the election. His top priority is creating a viable third party for the future. Today, Nader is mostly known for his run for president in the year 2000, which many Democrats say cost Al Gore the election against George W. Bush. From raiders to Jimmy Carter, many of Nader's longstanding allies turned on him. Ralph, go back to examining the rear end of automobiles and don't risk costing the Democrats a White House this year, as you did four years ago. People were angry. Thank you, Ralph, for the Iraq war. Thank you, Ralph, for the tax cuts. Thank you, Ralph, for the destruction of the environment. Thank you, Ralph, for the destruction of the Constitution. Once hailed as a night in shining armor, Nader was no longer the heroic consumer crusader. Far from it, he was now the country's nag, the irresponsible spoiler. And even now, more than 20 years later, Ralph Nader's presidential ambition still continue to eclipse his past work as a consumer advocate for many people. So when we interviewed him for this episode, we had to ask him about it. You ran for president in 2000. You got a lot of criticism for quote unquote, I'm putting air quotes here, ruining the election right for the Democrats, et cetera. Since that time, we've seen similar attacks to other third party candidates or people who are running outside of the Republican and Democratic system. Do you feel like the results of the elections we've seen ever since where we are today validates your run or further gives weight to the people who criticized you? Scape-goting by the two parties is a form of political bigotry that says to reform-minded third party candidates. No, we're not going to let you appeal to the voters. We want the voters. The two parties got to earn their votes. They don't own the votes. They have to earn them. Whatever you think of his decision to run for president, that belief that politicians like corporations should be accountable to us, the citizens, it's a big part of Nader's legacy. You made it acceptable to criticize big companies. Again, Nader's longtime friend and one-time enemy, Joan Claybrook. I think it's imbued politics in that way that people absolutely do see themselves as consumers. And with her without him, we're still living in a world that calls for this kind of consumer advocacy. Consumer Reports is pushing for a recall of two bassinettes. They say the bassinette may tilt causing the infant to roll over and possibly suffocate. Product recalls reached a seven-year high in the U.S. in 2023. Help officials say there's a possibility of salmonella contaminations. Almost 50% of the U.S. tap water could contain forever chemicals, which have been linked to certain cancers and decreased fertility. With PFAP, if you look for it, you will find it. So it's worth revisiting the question that Ralph Nader and the consumer movement posed for all of what kind of government do we want and what role do we play in it? Anybody who thinks that our democracy has not deteriorated in so many ways over the last 50 years ought to study how things got through Congress and state legislators in the 1960s, 1970. It was because a fraction of the citizenry decided to be active, decided to organize communities, decided to buttonhole their members of Congress, decided to march to demonstrate the file lawsuits to lobby to get the environmental protection agency created, the occupational safety health administration created, to get the critical air and water pollution laws through the drinking water safety law. This was done by less than 1% of the public. How much of a do you think has to do with the zeitgeist, the culture at that time in the 1960s and 70s, where there was a kind of what we would call now a kind of punk rock, anti-establishment, we're tired of tradition, we're trying to push through and create a new world, culture. Because to me, it feels like I, I didn't grow up as a millennial, I didn't grow up with that similar kind of broader culture. There's a lot more cynicism now towards what's toward what is capable of being done, how much change can actually be made, how much of it had to do with the culture of that time. You just mentioned the word cynicism, didn't you? That's a cop out. That's an indulgence, that's an indulgence of quitters that makes them feel good because when you're cynical, you're obviously smart, aren't you? You think you're smart. No, you're nuts, Mark. You're playing into the hands of the corporate supremacist. You're playing into the hands of the few who want to control the many, who could easily outvote the few and make the corporations our servants, not our masters. Paul Sabin says, naters legacy is complicated and not just because of his political ambitions. There's a little bit of lack of accountability about the ways in which the public interest movement might be flawed and limited. By becoming the nation's critic, he also helped to sow a mistrust in the government that Reagan seized on and which we live with today. People are looking to the government to try to do big things and there's a question of like, why can't we do these big things? Trust in the government has been low for decades. A recent Pew study found that less than a quarter of Americans believe in Washington to do the right thing most of the time. So where do we go from here? To this day, at 90 years old, Ralph Nader still believes that the answer to a democracy that works, why is in us the consumer citizens of America? Nothing can surprise the impact of organized citizenry. Year after year, the young generation forgets on how there was a time when Congress worked for us to some degree. There was a time when citizen action was worthwhile and produced results. So as we get, a younger generation doesn't have the historical context. The preamble of the Constitution starts with we the people. It doesn't start with we the corporation. It doesn't start with we the Congress. It starts with we the people. That's it for this week's show. I'm Ronda Difatech. And I'm Ronda and I'm team at Ablui and you've been listening to through line from NPR. This episode was produced by me. And me and Lawrence Wu. Julie Kane. Onya Steinberg, Casey minor. Christina Kim. Devin Cardiyama. Peter Balanon Rosen. Irene Guchi. Fact checking for this episode was done by Kevin Volkle. The episode was mixed by Josh Nua. We reached out to General Motors for comment on this episode, but did not receive a response. Music for this episode was composed by Rantine and his band Drop Electric, which includes Anya Mizani. Navid Marvi. Show Fujiwara. Thank you to Brandon Oncie, Phil Harrell, Dan Karima, Adrian Martinez, Devin Katiyama, Christina Kim, Anya Steinberg, Peter Balanon Rosen and Lawrence Wu for their voice over work. Special thanks also to the producers of daytime revolution. Global image works and sieves grow in for providing us with our kival footage of Ralph Nader, as well as Yoshikazu Fujimoto of Kodo, Sarah Gilbert and the North American Taiko Taikai. And as always, thank you to Johannes Dergy, Edith Chapin and Colin Campbell. And finally, if you have an idea or like something you heard on the show, please write us at throughline at npr.org. Thanks for listening. Music This message comes from homes.com. What kind of programs does this school have? How are the test scores? These are all things parents ask when they home shop. That's why each listing on homes.com includes extensive reports on local schools, homes.com, we've done your homework. This message comes from NPR sponsor REI co-op. You can't make more time, but when you opt outside, you can make the most of it. So make time for those early mornings, last minute trips and timeless views for small victories, big fails, and everything in between. And when you're ready, REI has the gear, clothing, classes, and advice to help you make the most of your time out visit your local REI co-op or REI.com slash opt outside. This message comes from Warby Parker. What makes a great pair of glasses? At Warby Parker, it's all the invisible extras without the extra cost, like free adjustments for life. Find your pair at Warby Parker.com or visit one of their hundreds of stores around the country."}